Brexit BULL! Remain 'experts' RUBBISH Britain but our stats show they keep being WRONG


Project Fear scaremongers have long been warning of chaos since vote to leave the EU in June 2016.
Treasury analysis published before the 2016 referendum said a leave vote would top the UK in to year long recession.
George Osborne, Chancellor at the time, predicted 820,000 job losses, while the Governor of the Bank of England, Mark Carney, predicted an immediate recession.
Mr Osborne published reports in the run-up to the historic vote, which warned that Brexit could lead to a “severe shock” and wipe £36 billion a year from the UK’s public finances.
Treasury officials assumed that Article 50 would be invoked as soon as the referendum result was announced and that there would be no policy response from either the Government or the Bank of England
Today’s report sparked fury among Brexiteers who have pointed to forecasts published previously which wrongly predicted huge job losses and a recession.
Brexit Party MEP Andrew England tweeted: “Project fear 2.0. The Office for Budget Responsibility is today claiming we’ll slip into a recession if there’s a no-deal Brexit.
But Article 50 was not triggered until March 2017 and the Bank of England also injected billions of pounds into the economy.
Meanwhile, the International Monetary Fund [IMF] warned leaving the EU would hit British living standards, stoke inflation and wipe up to 5.5 percent off GDP before Britons voted in the EU referendum.
And in a report published a few months later, the IMF intervened once again warning hat Brexit could spark a stock market crash and a steep fall in house prices.
Meanwhile, Bank of England boss Mr Carney has continued to talk down Britain every since the nation voted to unshackle itself from the bloc, warning the pound would crash, inflation soar and interests rates rise in the event of a no deal Brexit,
However proving scaremongering predictions wrong, the UK economy returned to growth in May by 0.3 percent from the month before, after declining 0.4 percent in April.
And UK unemployment has dropped to its lowest level in more than 44 years, as employers ramped up hiring across the nation. 
The Office for National Statistics said the UK jobless rate had fallen to a fresh low of 3.9 percent in the three months to January, down from 4 percent a month earlier, the lowest point since the start of 1975.

