THE SUN SAYS 
Britain’s economy is sound — don’t let the Project Fear merchants get you down


THE professional doom-mongers snorted when the Chancellor last week said the fundamentals of the British economy were sound.
But with pay rises at an 11-year high and employment the highest since 1971, it’s hard to disagree with him.
While Westminster watchers work themselves into a frenzy over Brexit, ordinary businesses up and down the country are getting on with it, and families are feeling the benefit.
Brits took on a real burden during the lean years of necessary austerity, as the Government worked to get the country’s finances in shape after ruinous Labour over-spending.
So the people deserve a pay rise but there is still much to do. Productivity is still lower than many of our competitors.
The high street still needs support and it’s hard to argue with those who think the time has come for real reform of business rates.
But in the meantime, don’t let the Project Fear merchants get you down.
THE US national security adviser John Bolton is a friend of Britain.
His commitment to working with the Government on flexible, ever-growing trade deals is a marked contrast to the hardline approach taken by the EU over the past three years.
He recognises that good deals can benefit both sides, reinvigorating our vital Special Relationship and our economies, too. PM Boris Johnson’s relationship with President Trump is a strength, not a weakness.
The American administration is also enthusiastic about a No Deal Brexit, confident that Britain will thrive even if we have a clean break.
If only some of our politicians had such belief.
Eco-unfriendly
GEORGE Freeman is an asset to the Tory party.
But the Transport Minister is mad to welcome eco-loons Extinction Rebellion to his “Big Tent” ideas festival.
These people would happily crash the economy in pursuit of their ideological aims. Sun readers are doing their green bit and are more than aware of the changing climate.
But no sensible tent, no matter how big, has space for these extremists.
IT’S clear that social media is having an impact on our kids’ mental health.
The smartphone revolution is one giant experiment and today’s children are the guinea pigs.
Parents, schools and the Government need to think about how to respond.

